# Kernel IO Subsystem

Kernels provide many services related to IO. Examples are scheduling, buffering, caching, spooling, and error handling.

The IO subsystem is responsible for protecting itself from malicious and errant requests.

## IO Scheduling

Ordering the IO requests in a first-come-first using system calls order is rarely the best choice. FCFS may throttle the performance by only serving a process that issues lots of consecutive requests, for example.

Good scheduling can improve the overall system performance, device sharing among requesters, and the average wait time for IO.

A wait queue for each device is maintained by the OS. When a process requests IO from a device, the request is enqueued into the wait queue. The IO scheduler rearranges the requests trying to achieve better system performance. The OS may also try to be fair or take process priority into account, serving the more time-critical processes first.

If the kernel supports asynchronous IO, it must maintain a list of the already-issued requests. it does so by maintaining a _device status table_. The table has an entry for each IO device and it indicates the current state of the device (e.g., busy, idle, not functioning)

## Buffering

A buffer is a memory area that works as an intermediary to store data transferred from/to a device to/from a process or another device.

Buffering can be done for several reasons.

1. Coping with a speed mismatch between the producer and comsumer.
    * Data transfer from network to SSD, the network throughput may be thousands of times lower than SSD. Therefore, an intermediate buffer in memory is maintained to hold data coming from the network. When the buffer is full, its content may be written to the SSD in one operation. Since the writting operation is not instantaneous, two buffers are used, when one is being written to the SSD, the other is being filled with network data.
2. Data transfer granularity may differ in the two communicating devices.
    * Network packet is 1024 bytes and disk granularity is 4KB.
3. Support copy semantics for IO.
    * When a userspace program uses a `write` and provides a pointer to a buffer to copy from, the kernel "buffers" the data, i.e. copies it to kernel space before writing to disk to ensure that the data written to disk does not change after the system call time.

## Caching

A cache is a storage area that holds a copy of recently-accessed data that is faster to access than the main storage element.

Caching and buffering are sometimes achieved using the same storage area. For example, the OS uses the buffer at which it stores disk data as also a cache. When a `read` syscall is called, the kernel first searches the kernel buffer which may contain data that was not yet written to disk, hence access it faster.

## Spooling

A __spool__ is a buffer that holds the intended _output_ of a device that cannot deal with interleaved data streams.

For example, printers can only output the data of one application at a time, while maybe concurrent applications are trying to print at the same time.

The OS solves this problem by using a spool for each application, and when a spool is filled with all the data that one application wants to print, the OS dispatches the spool to the printer queue.

This can be done by a daemon process or an in-kernel thread. In either case, the OS provides an interface for users and sys admins to control the queue of the printer and for example evict print requests from the queue.

Spooling is particularly important when the device cannot properly multiplex data from concurrent applications.

Other ways to deal with this problem:
    1. Device locking, mutual exclusive access to the problematic device is held by the process.
    2. Limiting only one process to use a particular file.
    2. Windows provides a means to wait for a device object's vacancy, and then it can lock the device on usage using a parameter to the `OpenFile` system call. Concretely `OF_SHARE_EXCLUSIVE`.

Using the previous methods, it's up to user-space processes to coordinate access to the device.

# Error Handling

Errors can be categorized as the following.

1. Transient errors
    * Network congestion errors
2. Permanent errors
    * Disk controller becoming defective

Modern operating systems have mechanisms to handle transient errors, e.g., on a `read` failure, a retrial is done with the same parameters, and an error on a network `send()` results in a `resend()`.

The OS is unlikely to recover on a permanent failure of a crucial component.

As a general rule, the OS returns a bit of information indicating the _status_ of the call, which may be success or failure. On failure, it may indicate the cause.

In UNIX, `errno` is used to indicate the error cause.

# IO Protection

Errors are usually caused in the context of IO protection, e.g., a user-space process may try to issue an illegal IO instruction. This can be mitigated by various mechanisms.

One way is to identify IO instructions as _privileged instructions_, which means that user processes cannot use them directly. User-space processes have to go through the OS to get an IO operation done. This makes it easier to identify and handle IO protection faults in the kernel, and indicate the error to the user-space process.

Additionally, memory-mapped IO portions must be protected from user processes, i.e. they must not be included in the virtual address space of any process.

# Kernel Data Structures

The kernel keeps state information about the use of IO devices. It keeps various in-kernel data structures that identify the state of the system.

Examples of in-kernel data structures:

1. Open-file table.
2. Data structures to track network connections.
3. Char device communication data structures.

At the kernel-level, accessing the hard disk is not like accessing a network connection through a socket. However, UNIX and UNIX-like operating systems provide file-system access to various entities. Accessing all those entities is done through `read()`.

The open-file table usually contains a _dispatch table_ that holds appropriate routines for each of those entities, depending on the type of the "file".

Windows uses message passing to pass an IO request from user-space to the device driver, passing through the kernel, the IO manager, and the device driver. Each of those destinations may alter the request format for the next destination to understand it better.

# Power Management

The OS is able to power-off all running processes, saving their state until they're needed. The OS can also halt unused CPUs and IO devices as long as they're not used.

Multi-core systems can be completely powered-off while they're not needed, and multi-core processing may be activated during high-demand times only.

These techniques are used in data-center servers to reduce power consumption.

In mobile phones, good power management is crucial to achieve suitable battery time. For this reason, Mobile operating systems are usually refined from ground-up with power-management of paramount importance.

Android uses the following three main features to ensure good power management.

1. Power collapse
2. Component-level power management
3. Wakelocks

## Power Collapse

The ability to put the device in _very_ deep sleep mode. The device uses power marginally more than if it was turned off, yet it can sense and respond to stimuli such as a button-press.

Power-collapse is achieved by powering off various devices, such as the screen, speakers, and the IO subsystem. A modern ARM processor supports deep sleep mode wherein it would respond quickly to an interrupt.

## Component Level Power Management

Android can know that its safe to wholly turn off a device by using the component-level power management. It's the infrastructure that understands the relationship between components and whether a component is currently in use.

To understand the relationship between devices, Android builds a device tree like the physical device tree in the system, each node represents a device. The device driver is responsible for identifying whether the device is in use or not.

Each component is turned off if it's not currently in use, and all it's descendants.

If all the components are not currently used, the system can initate power collapse.

## Wakelocks

Wakelocks are a means to prevent the system temporarily from knocking it off. Applications acquire wakelocks and release them accordingly.

## ACPI (Advanced Configuration and Power Interface)

ACPI is designed to allow the operating system to control the amount of power provided to each device or peripheral attached to the computer system

ACPI is available to the OS kernel as a list of _methods_ that are provided in the firmware and can be called by the OS kernel. For example, when the kernel needs to quiesce a device, it calls the device driver, which calls the appropriate ACPI method.