# Transforming IO Requests to Hardware Operations

How does the OS connect an application to an IO device?

The following is an example of the prosedure by which the OS propagates a disk read request from the application to the disk controller.

* The application refers to the data by the file name
* The file-system maps from the file name to the space allocation of the file.
    * In MS-DOS FAT file system, file name maps to a number that indicates an entry in the file-access table. The table entry tells which disk blocks are allocated to the file.
    * In UNIX, the name maps to an inode number, the corresponding inode contains the space-allocation information.

How is a connection made from file name to the disk controller?

* MS-DOS

The first part of the file name in MS-DOS starts with the hardware device followed by a colon. Example: `C:` The first part of every file name that's on the primary hard disk.

The fact that `C:` is associated with the primary hard disk is built into the OS. Thus, the OS maps files starting with `C:` to the port number attached to the primary hard disk.

The name of a file is separated by the colon to two parts.
    1. Device name space
    2. File name space

This is beneficial since the OS can implement specific features for a certain device without the others.

UNIX has no separation between the file name space and the device name space.

In UNIX, the file name is encorporated into the the file-system name space. This means that devices have names, just like files on the devices.

If the file-system provides access control and ownership, then devices have access control and ownership too. This means that there are two levels of access control, one for devices and one for the files stored on those devices.

UNIX has a _mount table_ that associates prefixes of path names to device names. When UNIX uses device name to search the file-system directory structures, it gets back a __<major, minor>__ device number that uniquely identifes the device. __Minor__ is used to index the device table to get back information about the physical port number or the MMIO space of the device controller.

Modern OSs benefit from this multi-stage lookup process and they can load devices on demand. Updating the appropriate tables with information about the newly-connected device without the need to recompile the kernel.

When a device is connected, it can be instantiated by the OS on the error that is caused by using it.

* The device interrupts the OS, which may be associated with a vector that has no ISR associated with. 
* The kernel will recieve the error, and discovers that there's a new device.
* The kernel probes for the device for its details.
* The kernel dynamically loads the device driver for the device.

## Typical life cycle of a blocking IO request

1. Aprocess issues blocking `read()` system call with a file descriptor of a file that has been opened previously.
2. The kernel system call code checks the parameters for correctness and identifies the system call.
3. If the data is available in the buffer cache, the data is returned to the process and the IO request is completed.
4. Otherwise, a physical IO operation must be performed. The process is removed from the run queue and is placed in the wait queue for the device. The IO request is scheduled.
5. The IO subsystem sends the request to the device driver.
    * In Windows -> Message passing
    * In *NIX    -> in-kernel subroutine
6. The kernel driver allocates buffer space to receive the data.
7. The driver sends commands to the device controller by writting to the device-control register.
8. The device controller interacts with the hardware to perform the data transfer.
9. The driver may poll for status and data, or set a DMA transfer into kernel memory. (The continuation is done by DMA)
10. When the DMA transfer is done, the DMA interrupts the CPU.
11. Interrupt handler signals the device driver, and stores any important data.
12. The device driver received the signal, and then determines which IO request has completed, and signals the IO subsystem that the request has been completed.
13. The kernel transfers data or return codes to the user-space of the requested process.
14. The process is activated and moved from the wait queue to the ready queue.
15. When the scheduler assigns the process to the CPU, the process continues execution from the point after the system call completion.