# Operating System Operations
Operating systems have lots of design choices and generally different along many different lines. However, there are many commonalities between operating systems.

The bootstrap program, which is the very first program to run when the computer is booted up, is a simple program. It is responsible for initializing all aspects of the system such as memory contents, CPU registers, and device controllers. It then have to load the operating system kernel into memory.

Once the kernel is on, it starts providing services to the system and users. Some of those services are provided outside of the kernel by system programs that are loaded into memory at boot time and become _daemons_. On Linux, the first system program to run is called _systemd_. In turn, systemd starts many other daemons.
Now the system is fully booted, the system waits for some event to occur.

_Trap_ is another form of interrupt that is software-generated. Those are caused either by an error or by a request from the user program for the OS to serve a special operation (This is called a _system call_).


## 1.4.1 Multiprogramming and multitasking. 

 **Multiprogramming**: 
 
 Organizing programs so that the CPU always has one to execute. It goes as follows:
 * OS keeps several processes in memory simultaneously. 
 * OS picks and begins to execute one of the processes. 
 * The process will eventually have to wait for some task such as IO operation or finish. 
 * Now, the OS transfers the control to another process that is waiting in the memory.

 As long as there are processes that need to be executed, the process is never idle.

In a non-multiprogrammed system, when a process is waiting for an IO operation to complete, the processor will have to remain idle, essentially wasting time.

<hr>

**Multitasking**: 

An extension of multiprogramming. 

* CPU also executes from multiple processes by switching between them, but switching happen more frequently.
* Provides the user better/faster response time.

Since IO operations run at _anthropinistic speed_, it takes ages (from the computer's point of view). So it is very beneficial to switch to another process to keep the CPU as busy as possible.

<hr>

In multitasking, the OS must ensure reasonable response time. Modern OSs' approach is virtual memory. This technique allows the execution of a process that is not entirely existent in memory. Also, its main advantage is that it enables users to run programs that are larger than physical memory.

## 1.4.2 Dual-Mode and Multimode Operation
A properly designed OS must ensure that an incorrect (or malicious) program cannot cause other programs(or the OS itself) to execute incorrectly.

to ensure the proper execution of the system, it must distinguish between executing user-code and OS-code.

At least, we need two separate modes of operation. _User mode_ and _kernel mode_. A bit is added to the hardware to indicate the current mode.

When the system is executing code on behalf of a user application, it is in user mode. 

When a user application requests a service from the OS via a system call, the system must transition into kernel mode to fulfill the request.

When the system boots up, it starts in kernel mode. The OS is loaded, and it loads other user applications and switches to user mode.

The hardware switches to kernel mode whenever a trap or interrupt occurs. 

This mechanism provides the means of protecting the operating system from errant users. This protection is accomplished by designating some of the instructions that may cause harm as _privileged instructions_. Thus, they can only be executed in supervisor mode.

If a privileged instruction was attempted to be done while in user mode, the hardware will treat it as a wrong opcode, and hence interrupt execution and jump to kernel mode.

Intel have 4 _protection rings_. (0 => kernel mode, 3 => user mode, [1, 2] => rarely used.)

ARMv4 systems have seven operation modes. 

CPUs supporting virtualization usually have a separate mode to indicate when the virtual machine manager is in control. VMM mode has more privileges than user mode to create and manage VMs, but less than those of the kernel.

### **System calls**
Routines that provide the means for the user to ask the OS to perform a task that can only be done by the OS.

A system call can be invoked in a variety of ways. 

Usually, it takes the form of a trap to a specific location in the interrupt vector. This trap can be executed by a generic trap instruction.

When a system call is executed, control is transferred to a service routine in the OS. Subsequently, the mode bit is set to kernel mode.

The kernel examines the interrupting instruction, parameters, and potentially stack or memory to determine the type of system call. 

The kernel verifies that the parameters are legal and then executes the request.
Afterwards, control is returned to the instruction following the system call (and mode bit set to user mode).


## 1.4.3 Timer
A timer is implemented in the hardware, it interrupts the processor periodically with either a fixed or variable period. 

This is mainly because we do not want to leave a process stuck in an infinite loop to be stuck forever. 

When the timer interrupts the CPU, control is directly transferred to the kernel with supervisor mode. The kernel can determine whether to treat it as a fatal error or to give the process more time thereafter.