# 2.7 Operating-System Design and Implementation

## 2.7.1 Design Goals

Defining goals and specifications is the first problem of designing an OS. The design will be affected by the choice of hardware and type of system (either designed for traditional laptops, realtime systems, distributed systems , or mobile systems).

The two basic groups of goals are _user goals_ and _system goals_.

User goals are quite obvious, such as convenient to use, easy to learn, reliable, safe, and fast.

A similar set of requirements can be defined by the developers who must design, create, maintain, and operate the system. The system should be easy to design, implement, maintain, and reliable.

It is easy to see that OSs differ in requirements and goals because they can be made to solve different problems. E.g., Wind River VxWorks realtime OS which was designed for embedded systems, versus Windows Server, a large multiaccess OS designed for enterprise applications.

## 2.7.2 Mechanisms and Policies

A mechanism determines _how_ something is done; policies determine _what_ will be done.

> Example: The timer construct is a mechanism to ensure CPU protection (among other things). Intervals on which the CPU gets an interrupt is a policy decision.

A general mechanism that can support a range of policies is preferable. However, usually, each change in policies require a change (even if small) in the mechanism.

## 2.7.3 Implementation

Once it was designed, an OS must be implemented. An OS typically consists of several programs.

Early OSs were written fully in assembly language. Now, most are written in C or C++, with slight amounts of assembly language.

The lowest level of software might be written in assembly language and C. Higher-level routines might be written in C and C++, system libraries might be written in C++ or even a higher-level language.

Using high level languages is beneficial because the code can be written faster, is more compact, and easier to understand and debug.

Improvements in compiler technology will improve the generated code for the overall system.

The possible disadvantage of writing in high-level languages is the reduced speed and increased storage requirements.
