# 2.10 Operating-System Debugging

Performance problems are also considered bugs. So, debugging can also include performance tuning.

## 2.10.1 Failure Analysis

If a process fails, most OSs write the error information to a _log file_.  
The OS can also take a _core dumb_, and store it in a file for later analysis.

> Core dumb: a capture of the memory of the process

Core dumps and running programs can be probed by a debugger to allow a programmer to explore the code and memory of a process at the time of failure.

A failure in the kernel is called a _crash_. When a crash occurs, the error information is written to a log file, and the memory state is saved to _crash dump_.

If a kernel failure occurred in the file-system code, it would be risky to try to save the kernel's memory to a file on the file system before rebooting.  
A commonly-used technique, in this case, is to save the kernel's memory state in a section of the disk, set aside for this purpose, that contains no file system.

When the system reboots, a process can start to gather the data from the saved area and write it to a crash dump file.

## 2.10.2 Performance Monitoring and Tuning

The OS must have a means of computing and displaying measures of system behavior.
Tools are characterized by either being per-process or system-wide. To make these observations, tools would use one of two approaches. _counters_ or _tracing.

### 2.10.2.1 Counters

The OS keeps track of system activities through a series of counters. Some are the number of system calls made, and the number of operations performed on a network device or disk.

#### Per-process commands

* `ps` &ndash; reports information for a single process or a selection of processes
* `top` &ndash; reports real-time statistics for current processes.

#### System-wide commands

* `vmstat` &ndash; reports memory-usage statistics
* `netstat` &ndash; reports network-usage statistics.
* `iostat` &ndash; reports I/O usage for disks.

Most counter-based utilities in Linux read statistics from the `/proc` file system.
`/proc` is a _pseudo_ file system. It resides in the kernel memory.
It's primarily used for querying per-process statistics.
It also includes statistics about the kernel.
The `/proc` file system is organized as a directory hierarchy.
For each process identified by a unique integer, there's a subdirectory.
For example, for proc `2155`, per-process statistics are in `/proc/2155`.

Windows provides Windows Task Manager. A utility that includes graphical statistics for processes, network usage, and I/O.

## 2.10.3 Tracing

Tracing tools collect data for a specific event. For example, the steps involved in a system-call invocation.

### Per-process commands

* `strace` &ndash; traces system calls invoked by a process.
* `gdb` &ndash; source-level debugging.

### System-wide commands

* `perf` &ndash; a collection of Linux performance tools.
* `tcpdump` &ndash; collects network packets.

## 2.10.4 BCC

BCC is a rich tool kit that provides tracing features for Linux systems.  
Its instructions can capture specific events. These events include system calls invocation.  
Its instructions can also monitor system performance such as time to perform disk I/O.Its instructions, namely the `eBPF` instructions, pass through a _`verifier`_ before injecting them to the Linux kernel.  
The verifier makes sure that the instructions do not affect the performance or compromise security.  
BCC is a front-end interface for the eBPF instructions.  
BCC can be used in servers that are always live and do not harm their performance.
BCC can trace and monitor essentially any area of the Linux OS.
