# 2.9.2 System Boot

How does the hardware know where the kernel is or how to load the kernel Starting a computer by loading the kernel is called _booting_ the system.

The booting process typically proceeds as follows.

1. A small piece of code known as the _bootstrap program_ or _boot loader_ locates the kernel.
2. The kernel is loaded into memory and started.
3. The kernel initializes the hardware.
4. The root file system is mounted.

Some computers use BIOS, which is a small boot loader located in a nonvolatile firmware.
This initial boot does nothing more than load a second bootloader. The second boot loader is located at a fixed disk location called the _boot block_. This program is a simple code (fit in a single block), and knows only the address on disk and the length of the remainder of the bootstrap program.

Systems nowadays use `UEFI` (Unified Extensible Firmware Interface) to replace BIOS. UEFI is a one-stage boot loader (faster than BIOS, which is multistage), it supports 64-bit systems better than BIOS (which originally ran 16-bit code).

The bootstrap can perform a variety of tasks in addition to loading the kernel. It can run diagnostics to determine the state of the machine and conditionally continue with booting steps if diagnostics pass.

`GRUB` is a bootstrap program for Linux and UNIX systems. Boot parameters, such as the name of the kernel image and the root file system unique ID.

<hr>

To save space as well as decrease boot time, the Linux kernel image is compressed and only extracted when loaded into memory.

The boot loader typically creates a temporary RAM file system, commonly known as `initramfs`. This file system contains necessary drivers and kernel modules that must be installed to support the real root file system (that is not in memory).

Once drivers and necessary kernel modules are loaded, the kernel switches to the real root file system and creates the `systemd` process.

<hr>

The boot process for mobile systems is slightly different.
Android's kernel is Linux-based, but Android does not use `GRUB`. Instead, it is left to vendors to provide boot loaders.

Android systems do not discard the `initramfs` and maintain it as the root file system.
Once the kernel has been loaded and the root file system mounted, Android starts the `init` process.

<hr>

Boot loaders for most OSs provide booting into _recovery mode_ or _single-user mode_ for diagnosing hardware issues or fixing corrupt file systems.
