# 2.4 System Services
Usually, an OS comes shipped with several _system services_ or _system utilites_. Those provide a convenient environment for the development and execution of processes.
Those can be roughly divided into the following categories.

* File management. Used to create, delete, copy, rename, print, list, and generally access files and directories.
* Status information. Utilities that ask the OS for the time, date, number of users, disk space, or similar status information. 
Some programs are more complex providing statistics about performance, logging, and debugging information.

* File modification. Text editors are usually provided with commands to search, modify, and perform transformations on the text.

* Programming language support. Compilers, assemblers, and debuggers for famous programming languages are often provided with operating systems.

* Program loading and execution. Loaders and debuggers for either higher-level languages or machine languages are needed.

* Communications. Programs that provide mechanisms for creating virtual connections among processes, users, and computer systems. Allowing file-transfer protocols, remote log-in, sending e-mails, and so on.

* Background services. All general-purpose OSs launch background system-programs at boot time. Some of these processes never exit until the system is halted. Those _daemons_ are the ones that simply doing a job continuously or waiting for an event to happen so that they're awakened to serve or react to this event.


Modern OSs are also shipped with _application programs_ that solve computing problems, such as web browsers, spreadsheets, database systems, compilers, and games.

