# 1.5 Resource Management
OS is a resource manager. Among the resources it must manage are the CPU, memory space, file-storage space, I/O devices.

## 1.5.1 Process Management
Processes need certain resources including memory, CPU time, files, and IO. OS is responsible for allocating those resources for the process.

A program by itself is not a process. A program is a _passive_ entity. Once a program is loaded into memory to run, it becomes an _active_ entity, namely, a process. 

A single-threaded process has one _program counter_ specifying the next instruction to execute. 

Two processes may be associated with the same program, they are nevertheless considered two separate execution sequences.

In a multitasking environment, processes execute concurrently by multiplexing on a single CPU, or multiple CPUs in an SMP environment. 

### **OS process management activities**
* Creating and deleting both user and system processes.
* Scheduling threads and processes on the CPUs.
* Suspending and resuming processes. 
* Providing mechanisms for synchronization and communication.


## 1.5.2 Memory Management
To improve the utilization of the CPU and the response time, several processes must be kept in memory, creating a need for memory management.
Many memory management schemes that can be used. Each of which requires hardware support.

### **OS memory management activities**
* Keeping track of which parts of memory are currently being used and which process is using them.
* Allocating and deallocating memory space as needed.
* Deciding which processes (or parts of processes) and data move in and out of memory.

## 1.5.3 File-System Management
For convenience, OS provides a uniform, logical view of information storage. The OS abstracts from the physical properties of its storage to define a logical storage unit, the _file_. 

OS maps files to physical storage and accesses these files via storage devices.

Each storage media has its own characteristics and interface. These characteristics include access speed, capacity, data-transfer rate, and access method (either sequential or random).

A file represents programs (both source and object files) and data. Data files may be numeric, alphabetical, alphanumeric, or binary. Files may be free-form (for example, text files), or can be rigidly formatted (for example, MP3 music files.)

Files are organized in directories for ease of use. 

When more than one user have access to files, it's desirable to control which user may access a file and how that user may access it. 

### **OS File-System management activities**
* Creating and deleting files.
* Creating and deleting directories to organize files.
* Supporting primitives for manipulating files and directories.
* Mapping files onto the mass storage.
* Backing up files on stable (non-volatile) storage media.

## Mass-Storage Management
Most computers use HDD and NVM devices as the main second storage means for both programs and data.
Most programs are stored in the secondary storage until loaded into memory.

The programs then can use secondary storage as the source and destination for its processing.

With that said, the proper management of secondary storage is of central importance.

Secondary storage is used frequently and it must be used efficiently. The entire operation of a computer may hinge on the speeds of the secondary storage subsystem.

### **OS Mass-Storage management activities**
* Mount and unmount.
* Free-space management.
* Storage allocation
* Disk Scheduling
* Partitioning
* Protection

## 1.5.5 Cache Management
The cache sizes are very limited. Hence, cache management is an important design problem. 

Thoughtful choosing the cache size, block size, and replacement policy can result in greatly increasing performance.

Transferring data to/from cache from/to CPU and registers is usually handled by the hardware. 

Transferring data to/from main memory from/to secondary storage is usually handled by the OS.

Data may appear in different levels of the memory hierarchy. Those copies must be _coherent_ so that if one process alters a datum in one level of the hierarchy, another process might try to use or fetch that datum from another hierarchy level and get an out-dated value. 

This situation is exacerbated in a multiprocessor environment. In addition to maintaining the memory hierarchy that is accessed by only one processor, other processors' internal registers and private caches of other processors must also reflect the most up-to-date value.

In a distributed environment, the situation becomes even more complex. Several copies of the same file can be kept on different systems. Any update in one copy on one computer must also update it on every other computer to guarantee _coherency_.


## 1.5.6 IO System Management
OS hides the peculiarities of specific hardware devices from the user. 

In  UNIX, peculiarities of IO devices are hidden from the bulk of the OS itself by the _I/O subsystem_. The I/O subsystem comprises several components: 
* A memory-management component that includes buffering, caching and _spooling_. 
* A general device-driver interface. 
* Drivers for specific hardware devices.

Only the assigned driver knows the obscureness of the specific device it was assigned to.