# 10.1.1 Hard Disk Drives

HDDs consist of a number of `platters`, each platter has two `surfaces` that are
covered with magnetic material.

Data is stored by recording it magnetically on the platters, and is loaded by
identifying magnetic patterns on the platters.

A read/write `head` "flies" over each surface. Heads are attached to an `arm`
that moves all heads as a unit.

Surfaces are logically divided into concentric circular tracks, which are
subdivided into sectors. 

The set of tracks at a given arm position is called a `cylinder`.

Each sector has a fixed size and it is considered the smallest unit of transfer.

Transfer rate: The rate at which data is being transfered from the HDD to the
computer to which it is attached.

Positioning time: Time to reach the wanted sector, composed of two parts:
    1. Seek time: Time to reach the correct cylinder
    2. Rotational latency: Time to reach the desired sector.

# Nonvolatile Memory Devices

Electrical devices whereas HDDs are mechanical devices. Most commonly, NVM
devices are made from NAND flash.

Flash-based NVM devices are usually packed in a disk-drive-like container, in
which case it's called a __solid state device (SSD)__.

NVM devices pros:

1. More reliable than HDDs since they have no moving parts.
2. Can be faster since there's no positioning time.

NVM cons:

1. More expensive per megabyte.
2. They can wear.

NVM semiconductors propose some challenges:

1. Data can be read in units of `pages`; pages cannot be rewritten to. A block
   must be erased (which is composed of a number of pages), and then rewritten
   with the desired modification.
2. NAND-based flash deteriorates with erasure cycles.

## NAND Flash Controller Algorithms

NAND flash cannot be rewritten and must be erased with the granularity of
blocks. Thus, blocks usually contain pages that contain invalid data.

Example: a file-system block is written twice. The first write is now spurious
and invalid and the second write is in another page and contains correct data.
Now the NAND block contains valid and invalid pages.

The NVM controller contains a Flash translation layer (FTL). This table marks
the physical pages that contain valid data. It also tracks physical NAND block
state. That is, when a block contains only invalid pages, it can be erased
safely.

NVM devices set aside about 20% of their overall storage as an area we can
always write to. This technique helps _wear leveling_.

Wear leveling: distributing writes over all the blocks so as to prevent one
block from being written repeatedly and wear faster than others.

Error detection and correction bits are stored alongside each block. If a page
repeatedly has errors, it might be marked as a bad page and not used again.

## Volatile Memory

DRAM is frequently used as a secondary storage device especially _RAM disks_.
Frequently, the OS treats a portion of its RAM space as a secondary storage. In
Linux, it's in `/dev/ram`.

`/tmp` is a file system of type `tmpfs` that is created at boot time, which is a
RAM drive.

They're useful for high-speed temporary secondary storage space.

Linux also has the temporary `initrd` root file system that is created at boot
time that allows other parts of system to access root file system before it
actually loads.

## Secondary Storage Connection Methods

Devices are either connected directly to the system bus, or via an IO bus such
as:

1. Advanced attachment technology (ATA)
2. Serial ATA (SATA)
3. Uneversal serial bus (USB)

A fast interface, NVMe is made for NVM devices that connects directly to PCIe
system bus.

IO operations are done through memory-mapped IO ports. A controller is built
into each peripheral device to interact with the CPU. The CPU places a command
into the IO port, the host controller sends the command to the peripheral
controller which receives the command and issue the IO request.

## Address Mapping

Whatever the secondary storage structure, it's addressed as a contiguous array
of logical blocks. Each logical block maps to a physical sector or a
semiconductor page. This unifies the interface used to access secondary storage
however its organized.

Example: Sector 0 may map to the first sector of the first track of the
outermost cylinder.

In theory, a logical address could be translated into a physical location but
that's not always feasible for the following reasons:

1. Some sectors may become corrupted, those are substituted with sectors from
   elsewhere, so logical addresses are sequential and physical addresses may be
   not.
2. Some HDDs have different number of sectors per track, so the mapping may be
   different.

For devices that use _constant linear velocity_, the bits per track is uniform.
This means that tracks that are on outer cylinders have more sectors than inner
tracks.

Some devices (CD-ROM and DVD-ROM) have the rotation increase as the head moves
from outer tracks to inner tracks to keep the same data transfer rate.

Disk rotation speed may be constant. However, bit density may be nonuniform. Bit
density reduces going from inner to outer tracks. This method is known as
_constant angular velocity_.
