# Storage Device Management

A new storage device is a blank slate. A platter of uninitialized magnetic
material or semiconductor material.

It must be first divided into sectors that the controller can read and write.

For NVM, the Flash Translation Layer must be initialized.

This process is called physical formatting. Formatting of a sector/page
typically is prefixing it with a header, and ending it with a trailer.

The header and trailer contain information used by the controller such as
sector/page number and error detection and correction information.

Storage devices are physically formatted as a part of the manufacturing
process so that the manufacturer can test the device and map logical
sectors/pages to physical counterparts.

Usually, drives can be divided into sectors/blocks of different sizes, e.g. 512B
or 4KB. Larger sector size means that fewer sectors can fit on a track, but also
means that less headers and trailers must be allocated and hence more usable
storage.

A device may be partitioned into one or more groups of blocks, and the OS can
treat each partition as a separate device.

The partitioning information is written in a fixed format in a fixed location on
the storage device.

When a device is recognized by the OS, its partitioning information is read and
subsequently, the OS creates entries for each partition. (`/dev` in Linux)

In Linux, a configuration file called `/etc/fstab` tells the OS to _mount_ each
partition that contains a file system to a specified location.

Mounting a file-system is to make it usable by the system and users.

Second step is volume creation and management. Partitions are mount to their
specified locations.

Third step is _logical formatting_. The OS stores the initial file-system data
structures into the device, e.g. maps to free and allocated space.

Some OS's provide _raw disk IO_, which bypasses the file-system structures that
the OS has, but this is not available in Linux. A similar result can be achieved
in Linux by using the `DIRECT` flag to the `open()` syscall.

## Boot Block

For a computer to start running, it must have a program to run. This is called a
_bootstrap loader_, and tends to be simple and small in size. For most
computers, the bootloader is stored in an NVM firmware ROM.

### The Boot Process of Windows

1. Windows stores its boot code in the first logical block on the HDD or the NVM
   device, which is called the Master Boot Record (MBR)
2. The boot process starts by executing code from the firmware, which redirects
   the system to the MBR. The MBR contains the list of partitions and from which
   partition it should boot.
3. The system identifies the boot partition from the MBR-stored info, it reads
   the first sector of that partition (called the _boot sector_), which is
   responsible to redirect the system to the kernel code.

MBR: The first sector in the HDD or the first page in the NVM device, to which
the firmware redirects the system. MBR has the list of partitions and which
partition is the one the system should boot from. The _boot sector_ is loaded
from the first sector from the boot partition, which can be identified from the
MBR-stored information.

## Bad Blocks

Blocks can go defective frequently since HDDs are purely mechanical. Bad blocks
could be discovered while formatting the disk, marking bad blocks not to be
used. During normal operation, on Linux, `badblocks` can be used to identify and
mark bad blocks as unusable.

Controllers usually contain a list of bad blocks that is updated frequently. Low-level formatting sets aside a portion of the disk as spare sectors, those are not visible to the OS. Whenever a bad sector is accessed, it's logically mapped to another sector from the spare space. This is called _sector sparing_.

1. The OS tries to read the logical block 87
2. The controller calculates ECC and finds that the sector is defective. It reports an IO error to the OS.
3. The controller remaps the block to a new one from the spare space.
4. After that, whenever block 87 is referenced, the newly-mapped physical block is referenced.

> This can miss up the OS scheduling algorithm run by the OS, for this reason, HDDs contain spare sectors in every cylinder, and also complete spare cylinders. When a block is defective, the newly-mapped block is from the same cylinder, if possible.

An alternative: _sector slipping_. If sector 17 is defective and the foremost spare block is 202, sectors from 18 to 201 are sifted by one place. Then sector 17 is remapped to sector 18.

NVM remapping is easier since there's not seek time that we don't want to miss up, therefore, a swap space is maintained and then blocks are taken from it when one block is found to be bad.