# Hardware Support for Synchronization

Paterson's solution for the critical section problem is a software-based solution.  
The algorithm involves no special support from the operating system or hardware instructions.  
Software-based solutions are not guaranteed on modern hardware architectures.  

## 6.4.1 Memory Barriers

A system may reorder instructions, a policy that can lead to unreliable data states.  
The _memory model_ of the system defines the guarantees given by the memory to the software. Memory model can call into one of two categories:  
* Strongly ordered: A memory modification on one processor is reflected in all other processors immediately.
* Weakly ordered: A memory modification may not immediately be reflected in all other processors.

As Memory models vary from one processor to another, the OS cannot rely on hardware guarantees regarding the visibility of memory modifications on a shared-memory microprocessor.  
Computer architectures provide special instructions that _force_ memory synchronization between all processors. Such instructions are called _memory barriers_.  
When a barrier is encountered, the system ensures that all loads and stores are completed before any subsequent load or store operations are performed.  
Even if instructions were reordered, a memory barrier enforces memory modifications to be broadcasted.  

```
// Thread A.
	while (!flag) // 1
		;
	print x;  // 2
```

```
// Thread B.
	x = 100;      // 3
	flag = true;  // 4
```

If this sequence of instructions were dispatched: 4 1 2 3  
The flag will be set to true in thread B, then thread A executes, finds that `flag` = true, prints the initial value of x. (not 100)  
Another dangerous sequence is loading the value of x in thread A while looping, then thread B executes, sets the flag, and the value of x (not reflected in thread A because it may be loaded in a register)  

Those two sequences are problematic. The code can be remedied by using _memory barriers_.

```
// Thread A.
	while (!flag)
		mem_barrier();
	
	print x;
```

```
// Thread B.
	x = 100;
	mem_barrier();
	flag = true;
```

This way, thread A will have to load `flag` first before loading x and thread B will have to store the value of X first before setting the value of `flag`.

Paterson's solution can also be fixed using a memory barrier.

## 6.4.2 Hardware Instructions

Such hardware instructions allow us to either test and modify the content of a word or to swap the content of two words _atomically_.

These instructions can be used to manage and solve the critical section problem in a simple manner.  

This section uses `test_and_set()` and `compare_and_swap()` instructions, which are hypothetical and not ISA-specific.

```
boolean test_and_set(boolean *target) {
	boolean rv = *target;
	*target = true;

	return rv;
}
```

What's most important about this function is that it must execute atomically. No two calls of the function can be done simultaneously. One function call is uninterruptable.

If a system supports a `test_and_set()`-like function, we can implement locks as boolean variables.  

This can solve the critical section problem like the following.

```
	do {
		while (test_and_set(&lock))
			; // do nothing.
		/* Execute critical section */

		lock = false;

		/* Execute remainder section */
	} while (true);
```

The `compare_and_swap()` instruction operates on two words atomically.

```
int compare_and_swap(int *value, int expected, int new_value) {
	int temp = *value;

	if (*value == expected)
		*value = new_value;

	return temp;
}
```

```
while (true) {
	while (compare_and_swap(&lock, 0, 1) != 0)
		; /* Wait indefinitely */
	
	/* Execute critical section. */

	lock = 0;

	/* Execute remainder section. */
}
```

When the lock is equal to 0, it's not _acquired_. The first call to `compare_and_swap()` will acquire the lock, i.e., set its value to 1. Then it will go on executing its critical section.

When a process finishes the critical section, it sets back the value of the lock to 0 for another process to acquire it.

When the lock is acquired, `compare_and_swap()` will return 1 and do nothing to the lock since its _*value_ is not equal to _expected_.

These implementations do _not_ guarantee the _bounded wait_ requirement.

The following implementation using `compare_and_swap()` maintains the bounded wait requirement.

```
while (true) {
	waiting[i] = true;
	key = 1;

	while (waiting[i] && key == 1)
		key = compare_and_swap(&key, 0, 1); // when this returns 0, loop exits.

	waiting[i] = false;

	/* Execute critical section */

	j = (i + 1) % n;

	while ((j != i) && !waiting[j])
		j++;

	if (j == i)
		lock = 0;
	else 
		waiting[j] = false;

	/* Execute remainder section */
}
```

The `waiting` array is initialized to all-zeroes.

The first process to execute will find `key == 0` after the first call to `compare_and_swap()`.
All other processes will wait (call `compare_and_swap()` will return 1).
A processes will execute `waiting[i] = 0` or `lock = 0` only when it exits the critical section.
The process that exits the critical section cyclically traverses the `waiting` array for a waiting process. The first process for which `waiting[j] == true`, it will deassert `waiting[j]`. Effectively making it the process to execute next. (while(waiting[i] && key == 1) will exit immediately).  
Due to the cyclic traversal, a process which is waiting _will_ be served within n - 1 "turns".


## 6.4.3 Atomic Variables
`compare_and_swap()` is not typically used directly to provide mutual exclusion. It's used as a building block to provide _atomicity_ for basic data types such as integers and booleans.

Incrementing and decrementing an integer can result in a race condition. Atomic integers can be used to ensure mutual exclusion. (such as incrementing a shared counter simultaneously.)


Atomic increment operation can be done using `compare_and_swap()`.

```
void inc(atomic_int *v)
{
	int tmp;
	do {
		tmp = *v;
	} while (tmp != compare_and_swap(v, tmp, tmp + 1));
}
```

To reason about the implementation, consider what would happen if two calls were generated simultaneously.
