# Thread Scheduling

On most modern OSs, kernel threads are the ones getting scheduled (not processes).  
User-level threads are managed by the thread library and the kernel is unaware of them.  
User-level threads must be mapped to kernel-level threads to be capable of running on multiple CPUs. This mapping can be done indirectly through LWPs.  

## 5.4.1 Contention Scope

On systems implementing many-to-many of many-to-one thread mapping, the thread library is responsible for scheduling user-level threads to run on available LWPs.  
This is known as _process contention scope (PCS)_. It's given this name since competition for the CPU resources takes place among threads belonging to the same process.  
A thread scheduled to an LWP by the thread library is not necessarily running on a CPU core. To run, an LWP's kernel-thread has to be scheduled onto a physical core.  
The kernel uses _system-contention scope(SCS)_ to decide on which kernel-thread will be scheduled next. Competition for CPU resources takes place among all threads in the system.  
The OSs that use one-to-one mapping, such as Windows and Linux, schedule threads only through SCS.  

PSC is done according to priority, the scheduler selects the runnable thread with the highest priority to run. User-level thread priorities are set by the programmer.  
PSC will typically preempt low-priority threads in the favour of higher-priority threads.  

## 5.4.2 Pthread Scheduling

the POSIX Pthread API allows specifying whether to use SCS or PCS on the user-level threads.

`PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS` and `PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM` can be supplied to specify the scheduling policy.  

If the `PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS` attribute is used, the library schedules user-level threads into available LWPs.

If the `PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM` is used (on many-to-many systems), each user-level thread will be allocated and bound to an LWP.

Some OSs only contain attributes that map to an existing policy. For example, on macOS and Linux, there's only `PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM`. 

> POSIX.1 requires that an implementation support at least one of
these contention scopes.  Linux supports PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM,
but not PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS.
