# 2.6 Why Applications are Operating-System Specific
Applications compiled for one OS are not executable on other OSs. 

Each OS provides a set of unique system calls. System calls are part of the set of services provided by an operating system for use by applications. Varying system calls is not the only barrier in running an executable on multiple operating systems.

An application can be made available to run on multiple operating systems in one of three ways:

1. The application can be written in an interpreted language (such as Python) that has an interpreter available for multiple operating systems.

2. The application can be written in a language that includes a virtual machine containing the running application. The virtual machine is a part of the RTE.

3. The application can be written in a language or an API, in which the compiler generates binaries in a machine-specific and operating-system-specific language. The application must be ported to each operating system on which it will run.

One of the hindering barriers in having fully cross-platform applications is that some operating systems provide APIs that do not exist in others. For example, an application made to run on iOS on an Apple iPhone uses its GUI API, which will not work on an operating system that does not provide it, such as Android.

Other challenges include the following.

* Each operating system has a binary format for applications that dictates the layout of the header.

* CPUs have varying instruction sets, only applications that include compliant instructions will execute correctly.

* System calls vary from an OS to another in many respects, including the specific operands and operand ordering used, how an application invokes the system calls, their numbering and number, and their meanings, and the return of results.

<hr>

The ELF format is not tied to any architecture, so it does not guarantee that an executable will run across different hardware platforms.

At the architectural level, an ABI is used to define how different components of binary code can interface for a given OS on a given architecture.
An ABI specifies low-level details, including address width, methods of passing parameters to system calls, the organization of the run-time stack, the binary format of system libraries, and the size of data types, just to name a few.