## 2.3.3 Types of System Calls
System calls can be grouped roughly into six major categories. 
_process control_, _file management_, _device management_, _information maintenance_, _communications_, and _protections_.

# 2.3.3.1 Process Control
Ending a running program, either in a normal or an abnormal way, is useful and considered a process control mechanism. If an error occurs and an abnormal exit occurs, it is useful to dump memory to a log file on disk. This file can be examined by a debugger. Under either kind of exit, the kernel must be able to switch back control to the invoking program (usually the command interpreter).

It's also desirable for the kernel to define an error leveling system. With more severe errors assigned to higher integers. (with 0 indicating normal exit).

The command interpreter can use this error level to determine what to do next.

A process currently executing may want to _load_ and _execute_ other programs. This is the mechanism that allows modern shells to execute programs from inside.

_loading_ and _executing_ a program from within the current process will alter the first program, and when the _executed_ program finishes, the process will exit. Thus, it's useful to have a mechanism to _create_ a process. This is also useful when the two processes have to run concurrently.

Setting and getting the _attributes_ of a process is beneficial to provide this kind of control. 

Having created a process, we might want to _wait_ for it to finish, of _wait for an event_.

This event can be _signaled_ using also a system call.

Sharing memory between processes is a means of interprocess communication, with this mechanism, we must ensure that not both processes are accessing the same portion of memory at the same time. Thus, we need a _locking_ mechanism to prevent more than one process from accessing the same location.

> Example of process control: Arduino. Non-multi-programmed, only one process at a time. Does not have an OS. It has a lightweight program called the bootloader which loads one program into the flash memory residing in the Arduino. If another process is to run, it has to completely replace the old one in memory.

> Example 2 of process control: FreeBSD is an example of a multitasking UNIX-like OS. When the system is up and running, the shell runs, awaiting the user's commands.
> Since FreeBSD is a multitasking OS, the command interpreter may continue running while another program is executing. To start a new program, the shell _fork()_&#8203;s a new process, and _exec()_&#8103;s the command in it. 
> The shell may run the program _in the background_. Hence it can issue other commands while that program is still executing.
> If the program was run in the background, no means of I/O could be provided to it through the keyboard. It may perform I/O on a file instead.


# 2.3.3.2 File Management
Commonly, processes need to _create()_ and _delete()_ files. Once the file was created, we need to _open()_ it. We may want to _read()_ from, _write()_ to, or _reposition()_ it. Finally, when done with it, we need to _close()_ it to indicate that this process does not need it anymore.

Files are associated with various attributes, we might need to _get_ or _set_ those attributes. File attributes include the name, type, protection codes, and so on.

System calls such as _move()_ or _copy()_ are possible. They might be implemented in the API using a combination of the existing system calls.

## 2.3.3.3 Device Management
A process frequently needs allocated resources for itself. If the resources are available, they're granted to the process. Otherwise, the process will have to wait for scarce resources to become available. 

A process may _request()_ the resource, and when access is granted and service is done through, for example _read()_ or _write()_, it may _release()_ it for other processes to take over.

_request()_ and _release()_ are like _open()_ and _close()_ for files. The similarities between I/O devices and files are very great that many OSs, including UNIX, have one combined file-device structure. Using this scheme, a set of system calls is used to control both files and devices.

# 2.3.3.4 Information Maintenance
Most OSs provide system calls to fetch the current _time()_ and _date()_. Other system calls may return information about the system, such as the OS version number, amount of free space in secondary storage, and so on.

There is a set of system calls that are useful for debugging a program. _dump()_&#8203;ing memory to a file, for example.

In Linux, there is a utility program called `strace`, which lists each system call as it is executed.

Modern CPUs provide an execution mode called _single step_, in which a trap is executed by the CPU after every instruction.

The OS keeps some information about all its running processes and system calls are available to get this information.

# 2.3.3.5 Communication
There are two models for IPC, the message-passing model and the shared-memory model.

In the __message-passing model__, before communication can take place, a connection must be opened. The name of the other communicator must be known, be it a process on the same system or a process on another computer connected by a network.
Each computer has its unique host name, it also has a network identifier, such as an IP address.

Similarly, every process has a unique identifier, namely, a process ID.
Those identifiers are passed to the generic _open()_ and _close()_ calls if this is the interface the OS provides.

The recipient process usually must give permission by calling an _accept()_ system call.
Processes receiving communication requests are usually special-purpose _daemons_, for which a system call to _wait\_for\_connection()_ may be provided by the OS. Those two communicating processes can then _read()_ or _write()_ to each other, and then _close()_ the connection.

In the __shared-memory model__, processes use _share\_memory\_create()_ and _share\_memory\_attach()_ to create and access shared memory portions. This is because OS does not permit processes to access each other's memory spaces, normally.

This means that both processes have to agree to remove this restriction. 
The two processes can exchange messages by reading from and writing to the shared memory portion.

Processes have to ensure they do not access the portion at the same time (locking).

# 2.3.3.6 Protection
Controlling access to resources provided by the computer system is done by the OS. 
Typically, system calls are used to _set\_permission()_ and to _get\_permission()_ of the resouces such as files and disks.
