# 1.1 What operating Systems do
A computer system can be divided into four main components.
* Hardware
* Operating System
* Application Programs
* User

The hardware, e.g., the CPU, the memory, and the I/O devices, provides the basic computing resources. 

The application programs, e.g., word processors, spreadsheets, and compilers, define the ways in which the hardware resources can be used to solve the user's computing problems.

The operating system controls the hardware and coordinates its use among the various application programs for the users.

A computer system can be viewed as an entity consisting of software, hardware and data. The OS provides the means for the use of the hardware resources using the software application programs that define the computing problems that can be solved by the system.

Operating systems can be viewed from the user P.O.V. and the system P.O.V. to gain a better understanding of the role of an OS.

## 1.1.1 User View
The user's view of a computer varies according to the interface being used. Many users interface with a computer in the form of a laptop or a desktop that consists of a keyboard, a mouse, and a monitor. Such systems are designed for personal use. Its user have the luxury to monopolize all its resources with the goal to maximize the benefit for one user. Ease of use is usually taken care of in the design with paid attention to performance and security. In such systems, resource utilization among various systems are not taken care of.

Some computers have very little user view. For example, embedded computers are ubiquitous in home appliances and automobiles. Those computers may have very limited user view represented in simple devices such as keypads and LEDs to show the state. Those devices' operating systems and applications are designed for minimal or no user intervention. 

## 1.1.2 System View
The OS is the most intimately involved program with hardware. In this context, it can be seen as a _resource allocator_. A computer system has many resources that can be utilized to solve a computing problem. Examples of those resources are CPU time, memory space, storage space, and I/O devices. 

The OS manages those resources and allocates them to the requests that come from application programs. 

Those requests might be conflicting at any time, the OS must decide how and when to issue those requests and schedule them fairly. 

A slightly different view of an OS emphasized the need to control various I/O devices and software application programs. In this sense, it can be seen as a _control program_ that ensures the proper usage of a computer and prevents errors.

## Defining Operating Systems
There's no universally accepted definition of an Operating System. A common definition, and the adopted one here, is that an OS is an always-running program, namely, the _kernel_, the middleware provided for application developers for the  ease of developing software applications, and system programs that aid in managing the system while it is running.