1.12 How do clustered systems differ from multiprocessor systems? What is required for two machines belonging to a cluster to cooperate to provide a highly available service?
> Clustered systems  usually comprise more than one computer(usually SMP systems) into one system. Computations can be distributed across those systems. 
> Multiprocessing systems are usually single physical entities that has multiple CPUs.
> To provide high availability rates, the state of the two machines must be replicated and constantly updated to ensure that both machines have up-to-date data. This way if one fails, the other could easily take over, restart the computation, and serve the request.

1.13 Consider a computing cluster consisting of two nodes running a database. Describe two ways in which the cluster software can manage access to the data on the disk. Discuss the benefits and disadvantages of each.
> Asymmetric clustering. One machine is constantly monitoring the other. The other machine is accessing data and serving requests. If the second machine fails, the monitoring machine could take over and serve the request. (No proper resource utilization.)
> Symmetric clustering. Both are accessing the data and serving requests, hence proper utilization of the two CPUs. (Complexity of implementation and providing locking mechanism so that state is consistent across the cluster.)



1.14 What is the purpose of interrupts? How does an interrupt differ from a trap? Can traps be generated intentionally by a user program? If so, for what purpose?
> Interrupts are mainly used to notify the CPU of an event that occurred and hence change the flow of control. 
> An interrupt handler is then called to deal with the event.

> Trap is a software-generated interrupt. A trap can be called intentionally by the user in the form of a _system call_ to request a kernel-only job. 


1.15 Explain how the Linux kernel variables HZ and jiffies can be used to determine the number of seconds the system has been running since it was booted.
> `HZ` variable represents the frequency of timer interrupt, `jiffies` represents the number of times the timer interrupt occurred. Therefore, the overall time equals `jiffies(second)` divided by `HZ(ticks/second)` 

1.16 Direct memory access is used for high-speed I/O devices to avoid increasing the CPU’s execution load.
> a. The CPU initiates the DMA request through the disk driver by changing the internal registers of the controller to the corresponding values.
> Once the operation is complete, the device interrupts the CPU to notify it of the completion.
> The CPU would be contending on the memory bus with the driver, so it would not be able to compute at the max speed.

1.17 Some computer systems do not provide a privileged mode of operation in hardware. Is it possible to construct a secure operating system for these computer systems? Give arguments both that it is and that it is not possible.
> It is possible. By confining the code that could be run on the system to only compiler-generated code, and design the compiler to do security checks that enable protection.
> ...

1.18 Many SMP systems have different levels of caches; one level is local to
each processing core, and another level is shared among all processing
cores. Why are caching systems designed this way?
> The first level is a very fast, very small local cache level (not shared, thus all it contains is useful for this particular processor, 100% storage utilization).
> The second level is a large, not-so-fast shared cache level, this allows dynamic sharing of all the cache size, hence if a processor does not cache much data, others can take larger space. 

1.19 Rank the following storage systems from slowest to fastest:
* Hard-disk drives
* Registers
* Optical disk
* Main memory
* Nonvolatile memory
* Magnetic tapes
* Cache

> Ordering from fastest to slowest: <br>
> Registers, Cache, Main memory, NVM, Hard-disk drives, Magnetic tapes, Optical disk

1.20 Consider an SMP system similar to the one shown in Figure 1.8. Illustrate with an example how data residing in memory could in fact have a different value in each of the local caches
> A processor `X` fetches a value, say at address `A`. (thus it gets transferred to the internal registers and local cache) Subsequently, a processor `Y` fetches the same address `A` to its local cache and internal registers. Now, Processor `X` alters the value at address `A`, this value gets written into the cache and not written back to memory. 
> Now there's an incoherent value at address `A`. Each processor has cached the old value, one altered it and the second never saw this alteration.

1.21 Discuss, with examples, how the problem of maintaining coherence of cached data manifests itself in the following processing environments:
> Single-processor systems: In a single-processing system, one process may fetch a datum in its address space and alter its value, another process may try to fetch the out-dated value. (solution: write-back caches.)
> Multiprocessor systems: Different processors might be caching the same memory location in their local cache, any update must be seen by all other cached values of the same address.
> Distributed systems: Multiple computers own and share files, if one computer alter the state of a file, all computers must see this update or otherwise an inconsistent state will occur.

1.22 Describe a mechanism for enforcing memory protection in order to prevent a program from modifying the memory associated with other programs. 
> Through virtual memory, each process will be associated with the portions of memory it is allowed to (execute/read/write). This way memory can be protected as only the owning process will be allowed to execute its portions of code.

1.23 Which network configuration—LAN or WAN—would best suit the following environments? 
> A campus student union: LAN
> Several campus locations across a statewide university system neighborhood: WAN.
> A neighborhood: LAN, possibly WAN for large neighborhoods.

1.24 Describe some of the challenges of designing operating systems for mobile devices compared with designing operating systems for traditional PCs.
> Limited resources when compared to traditional PCs.

1.25 What are some advantages of peer-to-peer systems over client-server systems?
> Not bottlenecked by one device, namely the server. All peer nodes act as both clients and servers. Thus better availability and response time.

1.26 Describe some distributed applications that would be appropriate for a peer-to-peer system.
> Cryptocurrency.