1.1 What are the three main purposes of an operating system?
> Providing an environment for applications to execute efficiently. 
> Allocate resources for requesting programs to perform required tasks.
> Supervision of execution of user programs and ensuring proper use of the system
> Manages the operation and control of I/O devices.


1.2 We have stressed the need for an operating system to make efficient use
of the computing hardware. When is it appropriate for the operating
system to forsake this principle and to “waste” resources? Why is such
a system not really wasteful?
> Subsystems that improve user experience typically "waste" resources but is better for the user. e.g. GUI. 

1.3 What is the main difficulty that a programmer must overcome in writing
an operating system for a real-time environment?
> Rigid timing constraints that must be met. If a timing constraint is not met, the system might fail or breakdown. The developer of and OS must ensure that certain tasks adhere their timing constraints. 

1.4 Keeping in mind the various definitions of an operating system, consider
whether the operating system should include applications such as web
browsers and mail programs. Argue both that it should and that it
should not, and support your answers.
> If applications are included in a specific OS, then they can benefit from features that are only accessible from the inside and therefore have better performance.
> Applications are _not_ a part of the OS. Including applications to the OS code bloats the OS code. Adding applications to the OS code may add security vulnerabilities to the system (more code runs from the inside of the kernel).

1.5 How does the distinction between kernel mode and user mode function as a rudimentary form of protection (security)?

> CPU capabilities when it's in user mode are very limited to computation and can generally cause no harm. Only when in kernel mode, the CPU can execute some dangerous instructions that directly deal with the hardware, I/O devices and the timer. Thus, this provides security mechanisms and protection of critical resources.

1.8 Some CPUs provide for more than two modes of operation. What are two possible uses of these multiple modes?
> VMM mode, which stands for the Virtual Machine Manager, which has privileges more than the user but less than the kernel. (used to run and manage virtual machines.)
> Guest Mode, which has read-only-like privileges of the system and cannot modify it in any way.

1.10 Give two reasons why caches are useful. What problems do they solve? What problems do they cause? If a cache can be made as large as the device for which it is caching (for instance, a cache as large as a disk), why not make it that large and eliminate the device?
> Supports the principle of locality, which states that recently-used data are highly probable to be used again soon. 
> Smaller is faster (and less expensive). Caches are typically implemented in a (quite expensive) technology called SRAM. Thus, a hard-disk-like size of cache would be unaffordable.

1.11 Distinguish between the client-server and peer-to-peer models of distributed systems.
> In client-server systems, the system is bottlenecked by the server computer because it is the one that does computation for potentially many clients.
> In P2P systems, all systems are interconnected, a requesting host shall send a discovery message to know which of peers can serve this request.