# 5.8 Algorithm Evaluation

This section concerns the following question. How to chose a scheduling algorithm for a system?

There are numerous scheduling algorithms, each having its parameters, pros and cons. Thus the choice can be difficult.

The first problem is to define a criteria to be used in selecting an algorithm(such as CPU utilization, response time, or throughput).

The relative importance of these elements must be defined, such as these:

* Maximum CPU utilization under the constraint that maximum response time is 300 milliseconds
* Maximizing throughput such that the turnaround time is (on average) linearly proportional to the total execution time.

Once the criteria have been defined, evaluation of the algorithm must be carried out.

## 5.8.1 Deterministic Modeling

Given a workload, we derive a formula to determine the performance of an algorithm. Given multiple algorithms to test, we compare their performance using the derived performance for each one.

Pros:

* Simple and fast
* It gives exact numbers allowing us to compare the algorithms.

Cons:

* Requires the exact input to the system, and the answer is strictly related to these input workloads.
* There's no exact input workload that is general enough to catch all the system behavior over the time it runs.

Over a set of examples, deterministic modeling may indicate tredns that can then be analyzed and proved separately.

## 5.8.3 Simulations

Running simulations of diffirent algorithms involves programming a model of the computer.

Generating data to drive the simulation is crucial. It has to represent the system's normal operation. It can be generated by a random number generator used to generate processes, CPU burst times, arrivals, departures, and so on. This way of generation can be not so accurate because system operation is normally not strictly random.

A better way is to use _trace files_. By monitoring a real system, we can extract information that can be fed to a simulator. This can produce accurate results for its inputs.