# 2.1 Operating-System Services
An OS provides an environment for the execution of programs. 
It provides various services for programs and users. 
Specific features and services differ from one OS to another because of design choices. There are some commonalities between all OSs.
These services make the programming task much easier than directly dealing with the hardware.

## User-assisting features 

* __User Interface__. It can be in the form of a GUI, a touch-screen interface for mobile systems, or a CLI. Each of which provides I/O means to interact.

* __Program Execution__. The system must be able to load programs into memory to run. The program must be able to end its execution either normally(exit) or abnormally(abort).

* __IO operations__. Programs may require I/O while running. I/O can be from a file or a device. For efficiency and protection, users can not interact with I/O devices directly, therefore the OS must provide means to I/O.

* __File-system manipulation__. Programs and users need to create and delete files, search for a file given its name, and list file information. Permissions management is also desirable to allow or deny access to files or directories.

* __Communications__. Processes may need to communicate in many circumstances, those processes can be on the same system, and communication can be done through _shared memory_, in which the two processes can write and from which they can both read. If those two processes are on two different systems, they can communicate by _message passing_ through the network, in which packets of information formatted according to a predefined protocol are moved between processes.
* __Error detection__. The operating system needs to be detecting and correcting errors constantly. Errors can occur in CPU and memory hardware (power failure or a memory error), in I/O devices (such as a connection failure on the network), and in the user programs (arithmetic overflow, division by zero, illegal memory access). The OS needs to take appropriate action for each type of error to ensure correct and consistent computing. Sometimes it has to halt the system or exit the error-causing process.

<hr>

## Efficiency-ensuring services
* __Resource allocation__. When multiple processes are running at the same time, they contend for available resources. It is the job of the OS to efficiently allocate those resources fairly for the processes. Those resources are CPU cycles, main memory bandwidth, and file storage (which have specialized allocation/scheduling algorithms) or I/O devices. 
For example, allocating CPU goes through scheduling routines that take into account the CPU speed, contending processes and their priorities, the number of CPU cores, and other several factors.

* __Logging__. Keeping track of programs' usage of computer resources can be beneficial. Most common OSs provide logging mechanisms. This information can be used for accounting (for billing customers) or simply for accumulating usage statistics that can be further used to monitor the system and utilize it better by system administrators

* __Protection and security__. When multiple processes are running simultaneously, it must be ensured that they do not interfere with each other's memory space. Also, no process can interfere with the kernel space.
Protection involves ensuring that access to the system resources is controlled. 
Users can not directly access and deal with I/O devices and generally the hardware. In this way, it is ensured that no malicious/insecure operations are done by incompetent users.
Security which is preventing outsiders' attacks is also important.
Security starts with authentication usually by a password to gain access to system resources. 