# 1.6 Security and Protection

Access to data must be regulated if multiple users are allowed to access the data.

Mechanisms that ensure that memory segments, CPU, files, and other resources can only be accessed by those processes that have gained proper access to those resources.

For instance, memory-addressing hardware ensures that a process can only execute within its own address space.

The timer ensures that no process gains indefinite control and never relinquishes control back to the kernel.

Devices control registers are not accessible to users so the integrity of the various peripheral devices is protected.

> Protection: Any mechanism for controlling the access of processes to a resource defined by a computer system.

> Security: The defense of a system from external and internal attacks. Such attacks include viruses and worms, DoS attacks, identity theft, and theft of service.

A system with working protection can still be prune to failure if security is compromised.

It is the OS's function to prevent some of the security-compromising attacks.

OSs maintain a list of user names associated with user identifiers (UIDs) to distinguish among all its users. In Windows parlance, this is a security ID (SID). This ID is attached to every process and thread.

Sometimes it's better to distinguish between sets of users rather than individual users. For example, the owner of a file on a UNIX system may be allowed to issue all operations on that file, whereas a selected set of users may be allowed to only read that file.

Accomplishing this requires defining a group name and a _group identifier_.

In the course of normal use, the user ID and the group ID are sufficient. However, a user sometimes need to _escalate privileges_ to gain extra permissions.

On UNIX, the _setuid_ attribute on a program causes the program to run using the file owner's ID instead of the current user's ID. 

The process runs with this _effective ID_ until it turns off the extra privileges or terminate.